About Scientific American - Scientific American Skip to main content SubscribeLatest IssuesMenu Scientific American Cart 0 Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?LoginNot yet registered? |NewslettersSearchSubscribe Close Search InputSearchCloseSearchAdvanced Search Coronavirus Health Mind & Brain Environment Technology Space & Physics Video Podcasts Opinion Store Subscribe Current Issue Cart0 Sign In Newsletters About Scientific American Scientific American covers the most important and exciting research, ideas and knowledge in science, health, technology, the environment and society. It is committed to sharing trustworthy knowledge, enhancing our understanding of the world, and advancing social justice. History Founded 1845, Scientific American is the oldest continuously published magazine in the United States. It has published articles by more than 200 Nobel Prize winners. Reach Scientific American reaches more than 10 million people around the world each month through its website, print and digital editions, newsletters and app and millions more through social media and other platforms. Authors Scientific American publishes work by journalists, scientists, scholars, policy makers and people with lived experience of scientific or social issues. See our submission guidelines for more information. Content Scientific American publishes in-depth feature articles, timely news stories, expert opinion and commentary, podcasts, videos, multimedia, photo features and other forms of storytelling. In addition to our monthly flagship magazine and pieces published daily on our website, we produce special Collector’s Editions, the digital magazines Mind, Space & Physics and Health & Medicine, ebooks and other products. We also host live events and webinars featuring a diversity of experts and journalists who share their knowledge about current events the way that science and scholarly inquiry enhance our understanding of the world and shape our lives. Our Parent Company Scientific American is published by Springer Nature. The main shareholders of Springer Nature are Holtzbrinck Publishing Group and BC Partners. As a research publisher, Springer Nature is home to other trusted brands including Springer, Nature Research, BMC and Palgrave Macmillan. Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence. Support Science Journalism Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845, including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.Subscribe Now! Follow us instagram soundcloud youtube twitter facebook rss Scientific american arabicالعربية Return & Refund Policy About Press Room FAQs Contact Us Site Map Advertise SA Custom Media Terms of Use Privacy Policy California Consumer Privacy Statement Use of cookies/Do not sell my data International Editions Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers. © 2021 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Scroll To Top Support science journalism. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Knowledge awaits.See Subscription Options Already a subscriber? Sign in. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Create your free account or Sign in to continue.Create Account See Subscription Options Continue reading with a Scientific American subscription.Subscribe Now You may cancel at any time.Sign in.
