DP: Welcome 42,683 titles preserved for the world! 162 in Oct 2021 — 169 in Nov 2021 — More... DP · Blog · Forums ID: Password: · Register · Help last changed Thursday, October 29, 2020 News Please try our Walkthrough for a preview of the steps involved when proofreading on this site. Site Concept Distributed Proofreaders provides a web-based method to ease the conversion of Public Domain books into e-books. By dividing the workload into individual pages, many volunteers can work on a book at the same time, which significantly speeds up the creation process. During proofreading, volunteers are presented with a scanned page image and the corresponding OCR text on a single web page. This allows the text to be easily compared to the image, proofread, and sent back to the site. A second volunteer is then presented with the first volunteer's work and the same page image, verifies and corrects the work as necessary, and submits it back to the site. The book then similarly progresses through a third proofreading round and two formatting rounds using the same web interface. Once all the pages have completed these steps, a post-processor carefully assembles them into an e-book, optionally makes it available to interested parties for 'smooth reading', and submits it to the Project Gutenberg archive. How You Can Help Register with the site as a volunteer and/or Donate to the Distributed Proofreaders Foundation. Registered volunteers may contribute to Distributed Proofreaders in several ways including proofreading, "smooth reading" pre-released e-books to check for errors, managing projects, providing content, or even helping develop improvements to the site. Volunteers may also join other members of our community in our forums to discuss these and many other topics. Volunteering at Distributed Proofreaders It's easy to volunteer at Distributed Proofreaders. Simply register as a volunteer. Once you've confirmed your registration by e-mail, you'll receive an introductory e-mail with basic instructions on how to log in and use the site. Then, you're ready to sign in and start learning to proofread or visit the smooth reading page to pick an e-book to read! Wherever you go, you'll find lots of information to help you get started. Please try our Walkthrough for a preview of the steps involved when proofreading on this site. There is no commitment expected on this site beyond the understanding that you do your best. Spend as much or as little time as you like. We encourage you to proofread at least a page a day and/or smooth read a book as often as your time allows, but it's entirely up to you. We hope you will join us in our mission of "preserving the literary history of the world in a freely available form for everyone to use." Distributed Proofreaders regrets that we are unable to verify court-ordered community service because our system cannot adequately record time spent participating. Current Progress ★43,129 in Completed These books have been processed through our site and posted to the Project Gutenberg archive. ★2,171 In Progress These books are undergoing their final checks before being assembled into a completed e-book. ★640 in Proofreading These books are currently being processed through our site; sign in and start helping! Our community of proofreaders, project managers, developers, etc. is composed entirely of volunteers. 556 active users in the past twenty-four hours. 1,000 active users in the past 7 days. 2,138 active users in the past 30 days. Questions or comments? Please contact us at dphelp@pgdp.net. Set language: Browser defaultEnglish - en_US français (French) - fr_FR Thank you for supporting DP! You can also support the site by making a donation to the non-profit Distributed Proofreaders Foundation. Donate Recently Completed Titles A Lecture on Stained Glass, Bell, R. Anning (English) PG #66850 Captain Bill McDonald, Texas Ranger, Paine, Albert Bigelow (English) PG #66849 Engravers and etchers, Carrington, Fitzroy, M.A. (English) PG #66848 Heiraten. Zwanzig Ehegeschichten [1920], Strindberg, August (German) PG #66847 "1914" [1916], Oxenham, John (English) PG #66846 La guerre est morte, Louis Delluc (French) PG #66845 The life of the weevil [1922], Fabre, Jean-Henri (English) PG #66844 More Completed Titles... Recently Begun Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science, and Art, 1886.07.17, ed. Robert Chambers (English) Cronica di Matteo Villani vol. 3, Matteo Villani (Italian) In Texas with Davy Crockett, McIntyre, John T.; Illustrated by John A. Huybers (English) More Recently Begun Titles... More Statistics... About DP Code of Conduct · Privacy Policy Mission Distributed Proofreaders is dedicated to the preservation of written works that are in the Public Domain in the United States by converting them into high-quality, freely available digital transcriptions. This is accomplished through the efforts of a supportive community of volunteers. Distributed Proofreaders follows the principles of the American Library Association Freedom to Read statement. History Distributed Proofreaders was founded in 2000 by Charles Franks to support the digitization of Public Domain books. Originally conceived to assist Project Gutenberg (PG), Distributed Proofreaders (DP) is now the main source of PG e-books. In 2002, Distributed Proofreaders became an official PG site. In May 2006, Distributed Proofreaders became a separate legal entity and continues to maintain a strong relationship with PG. ©Distributed Proofreaders · Page built at 2021-11-30 15:28 EST in 0.186s · Credits · Report a Bug
