Solar 'Superflares' Rocked Earth Less Than 10,000 Years Ago--and Could Strike Again - Scientific American Skip to main content SubscribeLatest IssuesMenu Scientific American Cart 0 Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?LoginNot yet registered? |NewslettersSearchSubscribe Close Search InputSearchCloseSearchAdvanced Search Coronavirus Health Mind & Brain Environment Technology Space & Physics Video Podcasts Opinion Store Subscribe Current Issue Cart0 Sign In Newsletters Share Latest Holiday Flash Sale. Save 35% Subscribe Scientific American December 2021 Solar 'Superflares' Rocked Earth Less Than 10,000 Years Ago--and Could Strike Again Although our sun is considered a quiet star, it is now thought to have repeatedly pelted our planet with enormous eruptions in the not too distant past. Could another occur in the near future? By Jonathan O'Callaghan Every now and then our star produces immense flares of particles and radiation that can wreak havoc on Earth. For more than 150 years scientists studying these outbursts and how they affect our planet have placed great focus on a single, seemingly pinnacle example: the Carrington Event of 1859. An eruption from the sun walloped Earth, pumping enough energy into our planet’s magnetic field to set off a massive geomagnetic storm that created beautiful auroral displays but also sparked electrical fires in telegraph lines. The storm was seen as an odd, minor inconvenience that caused limited damage to the electrical infrastructure of the time. Researchers today, however, recognize the Carrington Event, along with a 1921 storm of comparable strength, as an ominous warning of future catastrophes. This is a preview. Make a selection below to access this issue.Already have access? Sign in. Having trouble accessing this article? Please visit our FAQ page for more information Digital IssueRead online or download a PDF of this issue.$6.99 Digital Issue + SubscriptionThe digital issue plus 12 new digital issues and 4 years of archive access.$29.99 Print & Full Archive SubscriptionThis digital issue plus 12 new issues (in print, digital and tablet formats) plus archive access to 1845.$99.00Add to Cart More in the December 2021 issue of Scientific American We Must Improve Equity in Cancer Screening Galaxy Collisions Preview Milky Way's Fate The COVID Cancer Effect View Full Contents Visit our Librarian Gateway for additional information on purchasing a site license to this and other products Rights & Permissions Support Science Journalism Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845, including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.Subscribe Now! Follow us instagram soundcloud youtube twitter facebook rss Scientific american arabicالعربية Return & Refund Policy About Press Room FAQs Contact Us Site Map Advertise SA Custom Media Terms of Use Privacy Policy California Consumer Privacy Statement Use of cookies/Do not sell my data International Editions Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers. © 2021 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Scroll To Top Support science journalism. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Knowledge awaits.See Subscription Options Already a subscriber? Sign in. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Create your free account or Sign in to continue.Create Account See Subscription Options Continue reading with a Scientific American subscription.Subscribe Now You may cancel at any time.Sign in.
