What Is Machine Learning, and How Does It Work? Here's a Short Video Primer - Scientific American Skip to main content SubscribeLatest IssuesMenu Scientific American Cart 0 Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?LoginNot yet registered? |NewslettersSearchSubscribe Close Search InputSearchCloseSearchAdvanced Search Coronavirus Health Mind & Brain Environment Technology Space & Physics Video Podcasts Opinion Store Subscribe Current Issue Cart0 Sign In Newsletters Artificial Intelligence What Is Machine Learning, and How Does It Work? Here's a Short Video Primer By Michael Tabb, Jeffery DelViscio, Andrea Gawrylewski on September 29, 2021 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Reddit Share on LinkedIn Share via Email Print Deep learning, neural networks, imitation games—what does any of this have to do with teaching computers to “learn”? Full Transcript Machine learning is the process by which computer programs grow from experience. This isn’t science fiction, where robots advance until they take over the world. When we talk about machine learning, we’re mostly referring to extremely clever algorithms. In 1950 mathematician Alan Turing argued that it’s a waste of time to ask whether machines can think. Instead, he proposed a game: a player has two written conversations, one with another human and one with a machine. Based on the exchanges, the human has to decide which is which. This “imitation game” would serve as a test for artificial intelligence. But how would we program machines to play it? Turing suggested that we teach them, just like children. We could instruct them to follow a series of rules, while enabling them to make minor tweaks based on experience. For computers, the learning process just looks a little different. First, we need to feed them lots of data: anything from pictures of everyday objects to details of banking transactions. Then we have to tell the computers what to do with all that information. Programmers do this by writing lists of step-by-step instructions, or algorithms. Those algorithms help computers identify patterns in vast troves of data. Based on the patterns they find, computers develop a kind of “model” of how that system works. For instance, some programmers are using machine learning to develop medical software. First, they might feed a program hundreds of MRI scans that have already been categorized. Then, they’ll have the computer build a model to categorize MRIs it hasn’t seen before. In that way, that medical software could spot problems in patient scans or flag certain records for review. Complex models like this often require many hidden computational steps. For structure, programmers organize all the processing decisions into layers. That’s where “deep learning” comes from. These layers mimic the structure of the human brain, where neurons fire signals to other neurons. That’s why we also call them “neural networks.” Neural networks are the foundation for services we use every day, like digital voice assistants and online translation tools. Over time, neural networks improve in their ability to listen and respond to the information we give them, which makes those services more and more accurate. Machine learning isn’t just something locked up in an academic lab though. Lots of machine learning algorithms are open-source and widely available. And they’re already being used for many things that influence our lives, in large and small ways. People have used these open-source tools to do everything from train their pets to create experimental art to monitor wildfires. They’ve also done some morally questionable things, like create deep fakes—videos manipulated with deep learning. And because the data algorithms that machines use are written by fallible human beings, they can contain biases.Algorithms can carry the biases of their makers into their models, exacerbating problems like racism and sexism. But there is no stopping this technology. And people are finding more and more complicated applications for it—some of which will automate things we are accustomed to doing for ourselves--like using neural networks to help run power driverless cars. Some of these applications will require sophisticated algorithmic tools, given the complexity of the task. And while that may be down the road, the systems still have a lot of learning to do. Advertisement Related Video Nutrition Nutrition A Look Inside the Complex Gel on Your Thanksgiving Table Spektrum and Scientific American Staff Energy Energy What Is a Smart Grid, and How Might One Protect Our Energy Future? Michael Tabb, Jeffery DelViscio and Andrea Gawrylewski Engineering Engineering What Is 5G? Here Is a Short Video Primer Michael Tabb, Jeffery DelViscio and Andrea Gawrylewski Nutrition Nutrition What is Kombucha? Spektrum and The Scientific American Staff Nutrition Nutrition If Algae Has Not Found Its Way onto Your Plate Yet, It Probably Will Soon Spektrum and Scientific American Staff Nutrition Nutrition You Have Probably Eaten This Natural Food Additive without Knowing It Spektrum and Scientific American Staff Basic Chemistry Basic Chemistry The Science inside Your Ice Cream Spektrum and Scientific American Staff Microbiology Microbiology Watch Countless Small Worlds Pulse: From Liquid Crystals to Sea Cucumbers Meghan McDonough See More Support Science Journalism Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845, including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.Subscribe Now! Follow us instagram soundcloud youtube twitter facebook rss Scientific american arabicالعربية Return & Refund Policy About Press Room FAQs Contact Us Site Map Advertise SA Custom Media Terms of Use Privacy Policy California Consumer Privacy Statement Use of cookies/Do not sell my data International Editions Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers. © 2021 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Scroll To Top Support science journalism. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Knowledge awaits.See Subscription Options Already a subscriber? Sign in. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Create your free account or Sign in to continue.Create Account See Subscription Options Continue reading with a Scientific American subscription.Subscribe Now You may cancel at any time.Sign in.
