Why Frozen Turkeys Explode When Deep-Fried - Scientific American Skip to main content SubscribeLatest IssuesMenu Scientific American Cart 0 Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?LoginNot yet registered? |NewslettersSearchSubscribe Close Search InputSearchCloseSearchAdvanced Search Coronavirus Health Mind & Brain Environment Technology Space & Physics Video Podcasts Opinion Store Subscribe Current Issue Cart0 Sign In Newsletters Share Latest Holiday Flash Sale. Save 35% Subscribe Holiday Flash Sale. Save 35% Subscribe Basic Chemistry Why Frozen Turkeys Explode When Deep-Fried When water and boiling oil mix, the result can be volatile By Kristine Nolin, The Conversation US on November 23, 2021 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Reddit Share on LinkedIn Share via Email Print A deep fryer filled too high with oil and with the flame on, explodes in flame when a frozen turkey is placed inside. Credit: Mindy SchauerDigital First Media/Orange County Register/Getty Images Advertisement The following essay is reprinted with permission from The Conversation, an online publication covering the latest research. Deep-frying a turkey is a great way to get a delicious, moist meal for Thanksgiving. But this method of cooking can be a very dangerous undertaking. Every fall, millions of dollars of damage, trips to the ER and even deaths result from attempts to deep-fry turkeys. The vast majority of these accidents happen because people put frozen turkeys into boiling oil. If you are considering deep-frying this year, do not forget to thaw and dry your turkey before placing it in the pot. Failure to do so may lead to an explosive disaster. What is so dangerous about putting even a partially frozen turkey in a deep-fryer? I am a chemist who studies plant, fungal and animal compounds and have a love of food chemistry. The reason frozen turkeys explode, at its core, has to do with differences in density. There is a difference in density between oil and water and differences in the density of water between its solid, liquid and gas states. When these density differences interact in just the right way, you get an explosion. Understanding density Density is how much an object weighs given a specific volume. For example, imagine you held an ice cube in one hand and a marshmallow in the other. While they are roughly the same size, the ice cube is heavier: It is more dense. The first important density difference when it comes to frying is that water is more dense than oil. This has to do with how tightly the molecules of each substance pack together and how heavy the atoms are that make up each liquid. Water molecules are small and pack tightly together. Oil molecules are much larger and don’t pack together as well by comparison. Additionally, water is composed of oxygen and hydrogen atoms, while oils are predominantly carbon and hydrogen. Oxygen is heavier than carbon. This means that, for example, one cup of water has more atoms than one cup of oil, and those individuals atoms are heavier. This is why oil floats on top of water. It is less dense. While different materials have different densities, liquids, solids and gases of a single material can have different densities as well. You observe this every time you place an ice cube in a glass of water: The ice floats to the top because it is less dense than water. When water absorbs heat, it changes to its gas phase, steam. Steam occupies 1,700 times the volume as the same number of liquid water molecules. You observe this effect when you boil water in a tea kettle. The force of expanding gas pushes steam out of the kettle through the whistle, causing the squealing noise. Frozen turkeys are filled with water Frozen turkeys—or any kind of frozen meats, for that matter—contain a lot of ice. Raw meat can be anywhere from 56% to 73% water. If you have ever thawed a frozen piece of meat, you have probably seen all the liquid that comes out. For deep-frying, cooking oil is heated to around 350 degrees Fahrenheit (175 C). This is much hotter than the boiling point of water, which is 212 F (100 C). So when the ice in a frozen turkey comes in contact with the hot oil, the surface ice quickly turns to steam. This quick transition is not a problem when it happens at the very surface of the oil. The steam escapes harmlessly into the air. However, when you submerge a turkey into the oil, the ice inside the turkey absorbs the heat and melts, forming liquid water. Here is where the density comes into play. This liquid water is more dense than the oil, so it falls the bottom of the pot. The water molecules continue to absorb heat and energy and eventually they change phases and become steam. The water molecules then rapidly spread far apart from one another and the volume expands by 1,700 times. This expansion causes the density of the water to drop to a fraction of a percent of the density of the oil, so the gas wants to quickly rise to the surface. Combine the fast change in density together with the expansion of volume and you get an explosion. The steam expands and rises, blowing the boiling oil out the pot. If that weren’t dangerous enough, as the displaced oil comes into contact with a burner or flame, it can catch fire. Once some droplets of oil catch on fire, the flames will quickly ignite nearby oil molecules, resulting in a fast-moving and often catastrophic fire. Every year, thousands of accidents like this happen. So, should you decide to deep-fry a turkey for this year’s Thanksgiving, be sure to thoroughly thaw it and pat it dry. And next time you add a bit of liquid to an oil-filled pan and end up with oil all over the stove, you’ll know the science of why. This article was originally published on The Conversation. Read the original article. ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S) Kristine Nolin is an associate professor of chemistry at the University of Richmond. Recent Articles by The Conversation US 'Constructive Arguing' Can Help Keep the Peace at Your Thanksgiving Table Watch These 5 Key Issues in 2022 to See if COP26 Climate Promises Are Kept Dispatch from the Glasgow Climate Summit as Talks Intensify Read This Next Diversity Lost Women of Science, Episode 4: Breakfast in the Snow Katie Hafner and The Lost Women of Science Initiative Psychology 'Constructive Arguing' Can Help Keep the Peace at Your Thanksgiving Table James M. Honeycutt and The Conversation US Climate Change Northeast States Abandon Cap-and-Trade Plan for Cars Benjamin Storrow and E&E News Vaccines We Need School-Age Vaccine Mandates to End the COVID Pandemic Emily Mendenhall | Opinion Astronomy When Did Life Start in the Universe? Avi Loeb | Opinion Sociology Thanksgiving and the Myth of Native American 'Savages' John Horgan | Opinion Advertisement Newsletter Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter. Sign Up Support Science Journalism Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845, including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.Subscribe Now! Follow us instagram soundcloud youtube twitter facebook rss Scientific american arabicالعربية Return & Refund Policy About Press Room FAQs Contact Us Site Map Advertise SA Custom Media Terms of Use Privacy Policy California Consumer Privacy Statement Use of cookies/Do not sell my data International Editions Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers. © 2021 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc. All Rights Reserved.Scroll To Top Support science journalism. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Knowledge awaits.See Subscription Options Already a subscriber? Sign in. Thanks for reading Scientific American. Create your free account or Sign in to continue.Create Account See Subscription Options Continue reading with a Scientific American subscription.Subscribe Now You may cancel at any time.Sign in.
